---
layout: article
categories: CheatSheet
tags: [CommandLine]
image:
  teaser: Octocat.png
---
Git is a distributed version control system. It allows groups of people to work on the same documents at the same time, and without stepping on each other's toes. The following cheat sheet is sorted out based on the [Try Git tutorial I took in Code School](https://try.github.io/levels/1/challenges/1 "I'm a huge fan of Code School!").

###### To initialize a Git repository
```
git init
```

###### To see the current state of our project
```
git status
```

###### Add a new file to the staging area 
```
git add <filename>
```

+ **staged**: Files are ready to be committed.  
+ **unstaged**: Files with changes that have not been prepared to be committed.  
+ **untracked**: Files aren't tracked by Git yet. This usually indicates a newly created file.  
+ **deleted**: File has been deleted and is waiting to be removed from Git.

After `git add ` command, files are tracked as **changes to be committed**. Files are in the Staging Area, and they are not in our repository yet. We could add or remove files from the stage before we store them in the repository.

###### To add everything in and beneath the current directory
```
git add -A .
```

The `.` stands for the current directory. The `-A` ensures even file deletions are included.

###### To add many files of the same type using wildcards
```
git add '*.txt'
```

`Without quotes` : Shell will only execute the wildcard search within the current directory. Git will receive the list of files the shell found instead of the wildcard and it will not be able to add the files inside of the current directory.

Make sure to check what files and folders are staged by using `git status` before you do the actual commit. This way you can be sure you're committing only the things you want.

###### To remove a file or files from the staging area
```
git reset <filename>
```

###### To store our staged changes
```
git commit -m "This is a message describing what we've changed."
```

+ **Staging Area**: A place where we can group files together before we "commit" them to Git.
+ **Commit**: A "commit" is a snapshot of our repository. This way if we ever need to look back at the changes we've made (or if someone else does), we will see a nice timeline of all changes.

###### To see history
```
git log
```

Or Using the below to see more information for each commit  

```
git log --summary
```

###### To push local repo to the GitHub server
```
git remote add <remote name> <a repository URL>
```

This command is to add a remote repository. Git doesn't care what you name your remotes, but it's typical to name your main one origin.

###### To push local changes to remote repo (on GitHub)
```
git push -u <remote name> <default local branch name>
```

The `-u` tells Git to remember the parameters, so that next time we can simply run git push and Git will know what to do. 

###### To check and pull down any new changes
```
git pull <remote name> <default local branch name>
```

###### To stash changes
```
git stash
```

Used when you go to pull and you have changes you don't want to commit just yet. And `git stash apply` to re-apply your changes after your pull.

###### To check difference from last commit 
```
git diff HEAD
```

+ **HEAD** : The HEAD is a pointer that holds your position within all your different commits. By default HEAD points to your most recent commit, so it can be used as a quick way to reference that commit without having to look up the SHA.

###### To see the changes just staged
```
git diff --staged
```

###### To change files back to how they were at the last commit
```
git checkout -- <target>
```

###### To create a branch
```
git branch <branch name>
```

+ **Branch** : A copy of code we can make separate commits to. Then when we're done we can merge this branch back into our main master branch. This is useful when you want to work on multiple features at the same time. You wouldn't want to end up with a master branch which has Feature A half done and Feature B half done.

##### To switch branches
```
git checkout <branch>
```

Or we can use: `git checkout -b new_branch` to checkout and create a branch at the same time.   

###### To remove files
```
git rm '*.txt'
```

To remove all folders and files from the given directory:  

```
git rm -r <directory name>
```

If you happen to delete a file without using `git rm` you'll find that you still have to `git rm` the deleted files from the working tree. You can save this step by using the `-a` option on `git commit`, which auto removes deleted files with the commit.  

```
git commit -am "Delete stuff"
```

###### To merge a branch
```
git merge <branch name>
```

######  To delete a branch
```
git branch -d <branch name>
```

`-d` won't let you delete something that hasn't been merged. If you want to force delete a branch, you can either add the `--force (-f)` option or use `-D` which combines `-d -f` together into one command.

###### To push changes
```
git push
```
